  background: many different simulation frameworks, in different topics, need
to treat realistic datasets to initialize and calibrate the system. a precise
reproduction of initial states is extremely important to obtain reliable
forecast from the model. methodology/principal findings: this paper proposes an
algorithm to create an artificial population where individuals are described by
their age, and are gathered in households respecting a variety of statistical
constraints (distribution of household types, sizes, age of household head,
difference of age between partners and among parents and children). such a
population is often the initial state of microsimulation or (agent)
individual-based models. to get a realistic distribution of households is often
very important, because this distribution has an impact on the demographic
evolution. usual techniques from microsimulation approach cross different
sources of aggregated data for generating individuals. in our case the number
of combinations of different households (types, sizes, age of participants)
makes it computationally difficult to use directly such methods. hence we
developed a specific algorithm to make the problem more easily tractable.
conclusions/significance: we generate the populations of two pilot
municipalities in auvergne region (france), to illustrate the approach. the
generated populations show a good agreement with the available statistical
datasets (not used for the generation) and are obtained in a reasonable
computational time.
