  the problem of clustering content in social media has pervasive applications,
including the identification of discussion topics, event detection, and content
recommendation. here we describe a streaming framework for online detection and
clustering of memes in social media, specifically twitter. a pre-clustering
procedure, namely protomeme detection, first isolates atomic tokens of
information carried by the tweets. protomemes are thereafter aggregated, based
on multiple similarity measures, to obtain memes as cohesive groups of tweets
reflecting actual concepts or topics of discussion. the clustering algorithm
takes into account various dimensions of the data and metadata, including
natural language, the social network, and the patterns of information
diffusion. as a result, our system can build clusters of semantically,
structurally, and topically related tweets. the clustering process is based on
a variant of online k-means that incorporates a memory mechanism, used to
"forget" old memes and replace them over time with the new ones. the evaluation
of our framework is carried out by using a dataset of twitter trending topics.
over a one-week period, we systematically determined whether our algorithm was
able to recover the trending hashtags. we show that the proposed method
outperforms baseline algorithms that only use content features, as well as a
state-of-the-art event detection method that assumes full knowledge of the
underlying follower network. we finally show that our online learning framework
is flexible, due to its independence of the adopted clustering algorithm, and
best suited to work in a streaming scenario.
