  we are experiencing an abundance of internet-of-things (iot) middleware
solutions that provide connectivity for sensors and actuators to the internet.
to gain a widespread adoption, these middleware solutions, referred to as
platforms, have to meet the expectations of different players in the iot
ecosystem, including device providers, application developers, and end-users,
among others. in this article, we evaluate a representative sample of these
platforms, both proprietary and open-source, on the basis of their ability to
meet the expectations of different iot users. the evaluation is thus more
focused on how ready and usable these platforms are for iot ecosystem players,
rather than on the peculiarities of the underlying technological layers. the
evaluation is carried out as a gap analysis of the current iot landscape with
respect to (i) the support for heterogeneous sensing and actuating
technologies, (ii) the data ownership and its implications for security and
privacy, (iii) data processing and data sharing capabilities, (iv) the support
offered to application developers, (v) the completeness of an iot ecosystem,
and (vi) the availability of dedicated iot marketplaces. the gap analysis aims
to highlight the deficiencies of today's solutions to improve their integration
to tomorrow's ecosystems. in order to strengthen the finding of our analysis,
we conducted a survey among the partners of the finnish iot program, counting
over 350 experts, to evaluate the most critical issues for the development of
future iot platforms. based on the results of our analysis and our survey, we
conclude this article with a list of recommendations for extending these iot
platforms in order to fill in the gaps.
