  multilingualism is common offline, but we have a more limited understanding
of the ways multilingualism is displayed online and the roles that
multilinguals play in the spread of content between speakers of different
languages. we take a computational approach to studying multilingualism using
one of the largest user-generated content platforms, wikipedia. we study
multilingualism by collecting and analyzing a large dataset of the content
written by multilingual editors of the english, german, and spanish editions of
wikipedia. this dataset contains over two million paragraphs edited by over
15,000 multilingual users from july 8 to august 9, 2013. we analyze these
multilingual editors in terms of their engagement, interests, and language
proficiency in their primary and non-primary (secondary) languages and find
that the english edition of wikipedia displays different dynamics from the
spanish and german editions. users primarily editing the spanish and german
editions make more complex edits than users who edit these editions as a second
language. in contrast, users editing the english edition as a second language
make edits that are just as complex as the edits by users who primarily edit
the english edition. in this way, english serves a special role bringing
together content written by multilinguals from many language editions.
nonetheless, language remains a formidable hurdle to the spread of content: we
find evidence for a complexity barrier whereby editors are less likely to edit
complex content in a second language. in addition, we find that multilinguals
are less engaged and show lower levels of language proficiency in their second
languages. we also examine the topical interests of multilingual editors and
find that there is no significant difference between primary and non-primary
editors in each language.
