  search in an environment with an uncertain distribution of resources involves
a trade-off between exploitation of past discoveries and further exploration.
this extends to information foraging, where a knowledge-seeker shifts between
reading in depth and studying new domains. to study this decision-making
process, we examine the reading choices made by one of the most celebrated
scientists of the modern era: charles darwin. from the full-text of books
listed in his chronologically-organized reading journals, we generate topic
models to quantify his local (text-to-text) and global (text-to-past) reading
decisions using kullback-liebler divergence, a cognitively-validated,
information-theoretic measure of relative surprise. rather than a pattern of
surprise-minimization, corresponding to a pure exploitation strategy, darwin's
behavior shifts from early exploitation to later exploration, seeking unusually
high levels of cognitive surprise relative to previous eras. these shifts,
detected by an unsupervised bayesian model, correlate with major intellectual
epochs of his career as identified both by qualitative scholarship and darwin's
own self-commentary. our methods allow us to compare his consumption of texts
with their publication order. we find darwin's consumption more exploratory
than the culture's production, suggesting that underneath gradual societal
changes are the explorations of individual synthesis and discovery. our
quantitative methods advance the study of cognitive search through a framework
for testing interactions between individual and collective behavior and between
short- and long-term consumption choices. this novel application of topic
modeling to characterize individual reading complements widespread studies of
collective scientific behavior.
