  getting people cycling is an increasingly common objective in transport
planning institutions worldwide. a growing evidence base indicates that high
quality infrastructure can boost local cycling rates. yet for infrastructure
and other cycling measures to be effective, it is important to intervene in the
right places, such as along 'desire lines' of high latent demand. this creates
the need for tools and methods to help answer the question 'where to build?'.
following a brief review of the policy and research context related to this
question, this paper describes the design, features and potential applications
of such a tool. the propensity to cycle tool (pct) is an online, interactive
planning support system which was initially developed to explore and map
cycling potential across england (see www.pct.bike). based on
origin-destination data, it models and visualises cycling levels at area,
desire line, route and route network levels, for current levels of cycling, and
for scenario-based 'cycling futures'. four scenarios are presented, including
'go dutch' and 'ebikes', which explore what would happen if english people
cycled as much as dutch people and the potential impact of electric cycles on
cycling uptake. the cost effectiveness of investment depends not only on the
number of additional trips cycled, but on wider impacts such as health and
carbon benefits. the pct reports these at area, desire line, and route level
for each scenario. the pct is open source, facilitating the creation of
additional scenarios and its deployment in new contexts. we conclude that the
pct illustrates the potential of online tools to inform transport decisions and
raises the wider issue of how models should be used in transport planning.
