  much recent research aims to identify evidence for drug-drug interactions
(ddi) and adverse drug reactions (adr) from the biomedical scientific
literature. in addition to this "bibliome", the universe of social media
provides a very promising source of large-scale data that can help identify ddi
and adr in ways that have not been hitherto possible. given the large number of
users, analysis of social media data may be useful to identify under-reported,
population-level pathology associated with ddi, thus further contributing to
improvements in population health. moreover, tapping into this data allows us
to infer drug interactions with natural products--including cannabis--which
constitute an array of ddi very poorly explored by biomedical research thus
far. our goal is to determine the potential of instagram for public health
monitoring and surveillance for ddi, adr, and behavioral pathology at large.
using drug, symptom, and natural product dictionaries for identification of the
various types of ddi and adr evidence, we have collected ~7000 timelines. we
report on 1) the development of a monitoring tool to easily observe user-level
timelines associated with drug and symptom terms of interest, and 2)
population-level behavior via the analysis of co-occurrence networks computed
from user timelines at three different scales: monthly, weekly, and daily
occurrences. analysis of these networks further reveals 3) drug and symptom
direct and indirect associations with greater support in user timelines, as
well as 4) clusters of symptoms and drugs revealed by the collective behavior
of the observed population. this demonstrates that instagram contains much
drug- and pathology specific data for public health monitoring of ddi and adr,
and that complex network analysis provides an important toolbox to extract
health-related associations and their support from large-scale social media
data.
