  the social connections people form online affect the quality of information
they receive and their online experience. although a host of socioeconomic and
cognitive factors were implicated in the formation of offline social ties, few
of them have been empirically validated, particularly in an online setting. in
this study, we analyze a large corpus of geo-referenced messages, or tweets,
posted by social media users from a major us metropolitan area. we linked these
tweets to us census data through their locations. this allowed us to measure
emotions expressed in the tweets posted from an area, the structure of social
connections, and also use that area's socioeconomic characteristics in
analysis. %we extracted the structure of online social interactions from the
people mentioned in tweets from that area. we find that at an aggregate level,
places where social media users engage more deeply with less diverse social
contacts are those where they express more negative emotions, like sadness and
anger. demographics also has an impact: these places have residents with lower
household income and education levels. conversely, places where people engage
less frequently but with diverse contacts have happier, more positive messages
posted from them and also have better educated, younger, more affluent
residents. results suggest that cognitive factors and offline characteristics
affect the quality of online interactions. our work highlights the value of
linking social media data to traditional data sources, such as us census, to
drive novel analysis of online behavior.
