  education and training in digital forensics requires a variety of suitable
challenge corpora containing realistic features including regular
wear-and-tear, background noise, and the actual digital traces to be discovered
during investigation. typically, the creation of these challenges requires
overly arduous effort on the part of the educator to ensure their viability.
once created, the challenge image needs to be stored and distributed to a class
for practical training. this storage and distribution step requires significant
time and resources and may not even be possible in an online/distance learning
scenario due to the data sizes involved. as part of this paper, we introduce a
more capable methodology and system as an alternative to current approaches.
eviplant is a system designed for the efficient creation, manipulation, storage
and distribution of challenges for digital forensics education and training.
the system relies on the initial distribution of base disk images, i.e., images
containing solely base operating systems. in order to create challenges for
students, educators can boot the base system, emulate the desired activity and
perform a "diffing" of resultant image and the base image. this diffing process
extracts the modified artefacts and associated metadata and stores them in an
"evidence package". evidence packages can be created for different personae,
different wear-and-tear, different emulated crimes, etc., and multiple evidence
packages can be distributed to students and integrated into the base images. a
number of additional applications in digital forensic challenge creation for
tool testing and validation, proficiency testing, and malware analysis are also
discussed as a result of using eviplant.
