  information system (is) security threats is still a major concern for many
organisations. however, most organisations fall short in achieving a successful
adoption and implementation of is security measures. in this paper, we
developed a theoretical model for the adoption process of is security
innovations in organisations. the model was derived by combining four
theoretical models of innovation adoption, namely: diffusion of innovation
theory (doi), the technology acceptance model (tam), the theory of planned
behaviour (tpb) and the technology-organisation-environment (toe) framework.
the model depicts is security innovation adoption in organisations, as two
decision proceedings. the adoption process from the initiation stage until the
acquisition of innovation is considered as a decision made by organisation
while the process of innovation assimilation is assumed as a result of the user
acceptance of innovation within the organisation. in addition, the model
describes the is security adoption process progressing in three sequential
stages, i.e. pre-adoption, adoption- decision and post-adoption phases. the
model also introduces several factors that influence the different stages of is
security innovation adoption process. this study contributes to is security
literature by proposing an overall model of is security adoption that includes
organisational adoption and user acceptance of innovation in a single
illustration. also, is security adoption model proposed in this study provides
important practical implications for research and practice.
